Peter: Robotic aircraft are becoming ubiquitous.
There's a whole class now of quite sophisticated
toys you can go and buy from the shop for
a few hundred bucks. Generally, there are
quad rotor machines. You can control them
with your iPhone. You can fly them up. You
can look out the neighbor's fence. You can
look in neighbor's window. So, this technology
is starting to cause people serious concerns
with respect to privacy. So Doug, what does
ethics say about privacy?
Doug: The construct of privacy is a modern
construct.
Peter: Okay. We didn't use to have privacy?
Doug: Well, it's culturally defined.
Doug: In other words, what I consider private
today in 21st century Australia and what you
would consider private in 1850 London, it's
quite different. What we choose in terms of
privacy is different. It's contextual over
time and place. However--
Peter: So, it's not a fundamental underlying
principle?
Doug: No.
Peter: Okay.
Doug: No, absolutely not. Privacy is not.
It's founded in liberal democracy and the
right of the individual to choose and have
their own space. The Americans are the only,
I think they're the only culture that has
right to property. With the right to property
comes right to privacy. But the degree of
privacy, of course, is being argued right
now in Australia in terms of access to data.
Peter: Absolutely.
Doug: Yes. So, in terms of ethics, it goes
back again to those fundamental duties or
those fundamental concepts of autonomy. So,
we have levels of freedom in terms of autonomy.
So, those levels go from freedom, of course,
of restraint down to the freedom of choice,
then to informed reason, informed choice and
lastly, the choice based on the recognition
of moral values. So, those are areas in terms
of autonomy that are critical in ethics. Now,
if you lose your privacy, in terms of ethics,
the only ethical argument here is how it affects
your individual autonomy to make decisions.
But privacy is certainly not an ethical issue,
it's a cultural issue.
Peter: So, if it's cramping your style or it's changing what you can do, then it's an ethical issue.
Doug: It is.
Doug: Because it's affecting your power of
choice. Again, that's a modern construct is
privacy. It's a modern construct. It's quite
different. For example, in Roman times you
may take a shower - or you don't take a shower
you take baths - with other people, today
we have our own bathrooms. But privacy…
when I grew up with five kids and two bedrooms…
it's a different construct now, right?
Peter: Yes.
Doug: It's culturally determined.
Peter: There are some people who say that
privacy is a concept that is just going to
go away and we should just get used to it.
Doug: Yes.
Peter: Particularly, with respect to our online
existence and identities.
Doug: Yes, yes. Autonomy is the issue, not
privacy.